specs/error_state/ErrorInvalidCreationCode.md, before:

# InvalidCreationCode state

## Procedure

`InvalidCreationCode` is also a code store related error. This type of error only occurs when executing create (CREATE or CREATE2) opcode or transaction deployment (`tx.to = null`).

### EVM behavior

When handling a CREATE-kind transaction, initial bytecode opcodes are run and current call context is created. The final bytecode opcodes to store for new contract is the `RETURN` opcode of init codes result. `RETURN` opcode returns memory [`offset`...`offset` + `length`] content as bytecodes to store into state db.

In circuit bus mapping side, check this error in [here](https://github.com/privacy-scaling-explorations/zkevm-circuits/blob/b6156225fadc1a851cb177c255c905f449a4822d/bus-mapping/src/circuit_input_builder/input_state_ref.rs#LL1302C57-L1302C57). And when the executing opcode is `RETURN` and call context is creating (`call.is_create == true`) meanwhile.

Even though errors occur in CREATE-kind opcodes, it is special not checking error in executing opcode `CREATE` directly. Circuit implementation takes similar strategy, not constrain error directly in CREATE opcodes, but in `RETURN` step context. Following this way it is easy to get the key property state `length` and construct constraints against it.

Overall it looks like the following:

- Pop EVM word `offset` and `length` from the stack.
- Go to `InvalidCreationCode` state when call context is being created and first byte of code is 0xef.

### Constraints

1. First byte code is `0xef`.
2. Current call must be failed.
3. If it's a root call, it transits to `EndTx`.
4. if it is not root call, it restores caller's context by reading to `rw_table`, then does step state transition to it.

### Lookups

- Byte code lookup.
- Stack reads for `offset` and `length`. 
- Call context lookups for `is_success` and `rw_counter_end_of_reversion`.
- Restore context lookups for non-root call.

## Code

TODO: add after circuit merge first.

Commit message:

Update according to circuit implementation.

specs/error_state/ErrorInvalidCreationCode.md, after:

# InvalidCreationCode state

## Procedure

InvalidCreationCode is an error related with code store. This error only occurs when executing CREATE or CREATE2 opcode or contract creation transaction (`tx.to == null`).

### EVM behavior

When handling a contract creation transaction, bytecodes to initialize are run and the current call context is CREATE. The last opcode to store for new contract is RETURN. It returns `memory[offset...offset + length]` content as bytecodes to store into state DB.

In bus-mapping, when the executing opcode is RETURN and the current call context is CREATE, check if the first byte of contract code is 0xEF to identify this error.

Even though this error occurs in CREATE or CREATE2, it should be better to constrain it in the RETURN opcode. Since it is easy to get the available memory length and construct constraints with it.

Overall it looks as the following:

- Pop EVM word `offset` and `length` from the stack.
- Go to InvalidCreationCode state when the current call context is CREATE and the first byte of contract code is 0xEF.

### Constraints

1. The first byte of contract code is 0xEF.
2. Current call must be failed.
3. If it's a root call, it transits to `EndTx`.
4. if it is not root call, it restores caller's context by reading to `rw_table`, then does step state transition to it.

### Lookups

- Byte code lookup.
- Stack reads for `offset` and `length`.
- Call context lookups for `is_success` and `rw_counter_end_of_reversion`.
- Restore context lookups for non-root call.

## Code

TODO: add after circuit merge first.
