specs/error_state/ErrorOutOfGasDynamicMemoryExpansion.md, before:

# ErrorOOGDynamicMemoryExpansion state

## Procedure

Handle the corresponding out of gas errors for `CREATE`, `RETURN` and `REVERT` opcodes.

### EVM behavior

For the current `go-ethereum` code, the out of gas error may occur for `constant gas` or `dynamic gas`. The gas cost is calculated as:

```
gas_cost = constant_gas + dynamic_gas
```

The constant gas is different for `CREATE`, `RETURN` and `REVERT`.

```
if opcode == CREATE:
    constant_gas = 32000
else:
    constant_gas = 0
```

The dynamic gas is calculated as:

```
dynamic_gas = memory_expansion_cost
```

The memory expansion gas cost is calculated as:

```
next_memory_word_size = (destination_offset + copy_byte_size + 31) // 32
# `current_memory_word_size` is fetched from the execution step.
if next_memory_word_size <= current_memory_word_size:
    memory_expansion_gas_cost = 0
else:
    memory_expansion_gas_cost = (
        3 * (next_memory_word_size - current_memory_word_size)
        + next_memory_word_size * next_memory_word_size // 512
        - current_memory_word_size * current_memory_word_size // 512
    )
```

### Constraints

1. Current opcode is one of `CREATE`, `RETURN` and `REVERT`.
2. Constrain `gas_left < gas_cost`.
3. Current call must fail.
4. If it's a root call, it transits to `EndTx`.
5. If it isn't a root call, it restores caller's context by reading to `rw_table`, then does step state transition to it.
6. Constrain `rw_counter_end_of_reversion = rw_counter_end_of_step + reversible_counter`.

### Lookups

1. `3` stack pop for `CREATE` and `2` stack pop for `RETURN` and `REVERT`.
2. `2` call context lookups for `is_success` and `rw_counter_end_of_reversion`.

And restore context lookups for non-root call.

Commit message:

Feat/#456 implement ErrorOutOfGasDynamicMemoryExpansion error state (#467)
* feat: handle ErrorOOGDynamicMemoryExpansion error

* test: complete test cases

* refactor: move rw counter delta(+1) of IsSuccess lookup back to constrain_error_state

* refine stack operation

* fix lint

* chore: fix stack pointer for CREATE2

* fix incorrect rw count due to merge

* feat: using memory_offset_and_length to avoid zero length case

* fix incorrect rw count due to merge

* fix incorrect rw count due to merge

* chore: add missing  in md file and add comment for stack_offset+1 as review feedback

specs/error_state/ErrorOutOfGasDynamicMemoryExpansion.md, after:

# ErrorOOGDynamicMemoryExpansion state

## Procedure

Handle the corresponding out of gas errors for `CREATE`, `CREATE2`, `RETURN` and `REVERT` opcodes due to memory expansion.

### EVM behavior

For the current `go-ethereum` code, the out of gas error may occur for `constant gas` or `dynamic gas`. The gas cost is calculated as:

```
gas_cost = constant_gas + dynamic_gas
```

The constant gas is different for `CREATE`, `CREATE2`, `RETURN` and `REVERT`.

```
if opcode == CREATE or opcode == CREATE2:
    constant_gas = 32000
else:
    constant_gas = 0
```

The dynamic gas is calculated as:

```
dynamic_gas = memory_expansion_cost
```

The memory expansion gas cost is calculated as:

```
next_memory_word_size = (destination_offset + copy_byte_size + 31) // 32
# `current_memory_word_size` is fetched from the execution step.
if next_memory_word_size <= current_memory_word_size:
    memory_expansion_gas_cost = 0
else:
    memory_expansion_gas_cost = (
        3 * (next_memory_word_size - current_memory_word_size)
        + next_memory_word_size * next_memory_word_size // 512
        - current_memory_word_size * current_memory_word_size // 512
    )
```

### Constraints

1. Current opcode is one of `CREATE`, `CREATE2`, `RETURN` and `REVERT`.
2. Constrain `gas_left < gas_cost`.
3. Current call must fail.
4. If it's a root call, it transits to `EndTx`.
5. If it isn't a root call, it restores caller's context by reading to `rw_table`, then does step state transition to it.
6. Constrain `rw_counter_end_of_reversion = rw_counter_end_of_step + reversible_counter`.

### Lookups

1. `2` stack lookups for `CREATE`, `CREATE2`, `RETURN` and `REVERT`.
2. `2` call context lookups for `is_success` and `rw_counter_end_of_reversion`.

And restore context lookups for non-root call.

## Code

Please refer to `src/zkevm_specs/evm/execution/error_oog_dynamic_memory_expansion.py`.
