specs/keccak256/permutation.md, before:


We denote `X.curr()` and `X.prev()` for current row and previous row for column X. If curr or prev is unspecified for a column, we refer to the cell at the current row.

```python
# state: 25 cols/words that the current keccak_f works on
# input: 17 cols/words that the current keccak_f works on
# padded_input: 17 cols/words from the padding validator
def keccak_f(state_tag):
    # Determine the input we use:
    # If we are at the finalize step, use the padded input, otherwise, simply use the current input.
    _input = (state_tag.curr() == Tag.Continue) * input.curr() + (state_tag.curr() == Tag.Finalize) * padded_input.curr()

    # if the previous keccak_f is marked as finalized, we need to initialize the state
    state_base13 = (state_tag.prev() == Tag.Finalize) * convert_base(
        _input.curr(), _from=2, _to=13
    )
    # if the previous keccak_f is NOT marked as finalized, we need to absorb the current input from the previous output
    state_base9 = (state_tag.prev() == Tag.Continue) * absorb(state_base9.prev(), _input.curr())
    state_base13 = state_base13 + (state_tag.prev() == Tag.Continue) * convert_base(state_base9, _from=9, _to=13)
    # apply 24th of the round constant which was not completed in previous round
    state_base13 = (state_tag.prev() == Tag.Continue) * iota_base13(state_base13)

    # The core permutation
    # first 23 rounds
    for _ in range(23):
        state_base13 = theta(state_base13)
        state_base9 = rho(state_base13)
        state_base9 = pi(state_base9)
        state_base9 = xi(state_base9)
        state_base9 = iota_base9(state_base9)
        state_base13 = convert_base(state_b9, _from=9, _to=13)
    # The 24-th round we do iota different
    state_base13 = theta(state_base13)
    state_base9 = rho(state_base13)
    state_base9 = pi(state_base9)
    state_base9 = xi(state_base9)
    # The case of Finalize
    state_base9 = (state_tag == Tag.Finalize) * iota_base9(state_base9) 
    curr.out_state_base2 = (state_tag == Tag.Finalize) * convert_base(
        state_base9, _from=9, _to=2
    )
    # In the case of not finalizing, we leave the next round to complete the last iota
```

## Examples

An input of 160 bytes. It would 2 `keccak_f` to complete the hash.

The `state_tag` starts with `Null`.

The first `keccak_f` comes with its state_tag `Continue`. The `keccak_f` initializes the state as 25 zero words. It then takes the first 136 bytes of the input in 17 words or binary. The `keccak_f` converts the 17 words from binary to base 13 then adds them to the state. We now getting a base 13 pre-state with 17 non-zero words and 8 zero words. The `keccak_f` runs the core permutations to get the post-state in base 9.

The second `keccak_f` comes with its state_tag `Finalize`. The `keccak_f` initializes the state from the previous `keccak_f`'s base 9 post-state. The input still has remaining 24 bytes. The input is padded to a full 136 bytes. The `keccak_f` takes the padded input as 17 words, converting them to base 9. `keccak_f` adds the 17 words to the state, then runs the core permutations.

Commit message:

[Keccak] Add Start and End state_tags and references (#192)
* add start and end state_tag

* add references

specs/keccak256/permutation.md, after:


We denote `X.curr()` and `X.prev()` for current row and previous row for column X. If curr or prev is unspecified for a column, we refer to the cell at the current row.

```python
# state: 25 cols/words that the current keccak_f works on
# input: 17 cols/words that the current keccak_f works on
# padded_input: 17 cols/words from the padding validator
def keccak_f(state_tag):
    # Determine the input we use:
    # If we are at the finalize step, use the padded input, otherwise, simply use the current input.
    _input = (state_tag.curr() == Tag.Continue) * input.curr() + (state_tag.curr() == Tag.Finalize) * padded_input.curr()

    # if the previous keccak_f is marked as finalized, we need to initialize the state
    state_base13 = (state_tag.prev() == Tag.Finalize) * convert_base(
        _input.curr(), _from=2, _to=13
    )
    # if the previous keccak_f is NOT marked as finalized, we need to absorb the current input from the previous output
    state_base9 = (state_tag.prev() == Tag.Continue) * absorb(state_base9.prev(), _input.curr())
    state_base13 = state_base13 + (state_tag.prev() == Tag.Continue) * convert_base(state_base9, _from=9, _to=13)
    # apply 24th of the round constant which was not completed in previous round
    state_base13 = (state_tag.prev() == Tag.Continue) * iota_base13(state_base13)

    # The core permutation
    # first 23 rounds
    for _ in range(23):
        state_base13 = theta(state_base13)
        state_base9 = rho(state_base13)
        state_base9 = pi(state_base9)
        state_base9 = xi(state_base9)
        state_base9 = iota_base9(state_base9)
        state_base13 = convert_base(state_b9, _from=9, _to=13)
    # The 24-th round we do iota different
    state_base13 = theta(state_base13)
    state_base9 = rho(state_base13)
    state_base9 = pi(state_base9)
    state_base9 = xi(state_base9)
    # The case of Finalize
    state_base9 = (state_tag == Tag.Finalize) * iota_base9(state_base9) 
    curr.out_state_base2 = (state_tag == Tag.Finalize) * convert_base(
        state_base9, _from=9, _to=2
    )
    # In the case of not finalizing, we leave the next round to complete the last iota
```

## Examples

An input of 160 bytes. It would 2 `keccak_f` to complete the hash.

The `state_tag` starts with `Start`.

The first `keccak_f` comes with its state_tag `Continue`. The `keccak_f` initializes the state as 25 zero words. It then takes the first 136 bytes of the input in 17 words or binary. The `keccak_f` converts the 17 words from binary to base 13 then adds them to the state. We now getting a base 13 pre-state with 17 non-zero words and 8 zero words. The `keccak_f` runs the core permutations to get the post-state in base 9.

The second `keccak_f` comes with its state_tag `Finalize`. The `keccak_f` initializes the state from the previous `keccak_f`'s base 9 post-state. The input still has remaining 24 bytes. The input is padded to a full 136 bytes. The `keccak_f` takes the padded input as 17 words, converting them to base 9. `keccak_f` adds the 17 words to the state, then runs the core permutations.

## References

We use Konstantin Panarin's [sparse representation](https://hackmd.io/xfgP5_uMTZyaEJJG4EJoRQ) idea and ported implementation from [matter-labs/franklin-crypto](https://github.com/matter-labs/franklin-crypto/blob/dev/src/plonk/circuit/hashes_with_tables/keccak/gadgets.rs)
