specs/opcode/51MLOAD_52MSTORE_53MSTORE8.md, before:

# MLOAD & MSTORE & MSTORE8 opcodes

## Procedure

### EVM behavior

The `MLOAD` opcode loads a word (32 bytes of data) from memory. This is done by popping the `address` from the stack. The data at `[address, address + 31]` is then loaded from memory and pushed to the stack.

The `MSTORE` opcode writes a word (32 bytes of data) to memory. This is done by popping two value, the `address` and then the `value`, from the stack. `value` is then written to memory at `[address, address + 31]`.

The `MSTORE8` opcode works similarly to `MSTORE` except that only the LSB of `value` is written to `address`.

The required memory size per call is tracked. If an operation requires expanding the memory size an additional gas cost is charged. The calculations are done on the highest memory location accessed. For `MLOAD` and `MSTORE` this is `address + 32` (because 32 bytes are read/written) and for `MSTORE8` this is `address + 1` (only a single byte is written).

The memory size is calculated as follows:

```
memory_size(address) := ceil(address/32)
```

The memory cost is calculated like this:

```
Gmem := 3
memory_cost(memory_size) := Gmem * memory_size + floor(memory_size * memory_size / 512)
```

The gas cost charged for the op is the additional `memory_size` needed:

```
MLOAD/MSTORE: offset := 32, MSTORE8: offset := 1
next_memory_size := max(curr_memory_size, memory_size(address + offset))
memory_gas_cost := memory_cost(next_memory_size) - memory_cost(curr_memory_size)
```

### Circuit behavior

The `MemoryGadget` takes arguments `address: [u8;32]`, `value: [u8;32]`, `curr_memory_size: u64`, `opcode: u8`. There are also some additional helper inputs used by the general gadgets used for the implementation.

There is a check if `opcode` is `MLOAD`, `MSTORE` or `MSTORE8`, which is used to change some operations so the correct logic for each opcode is done.

The memory expansion calculations and the memory addressing use a partial address value consisting of the 5 LSBs of address. If any other of the higher bytes are used an out-of-gas exception is always thrown.

The new memory size and gas necessary for a potential memory expansion is calculated using the formulas above.

For the stack busmapping lookups, the top value is always the `address`. Then, depending on the opcode:

- `MLOAD`: `value` is pushed on top of the stack (`stack_offset == 0; is_write == true`)
- `MSTORE`/`MSTORE8`: `value` is popped from top of the stack (`stack_offset == 1; is_write == false`)

For `MLOAD`/`MSTORE` 32 memory busmapping lookups are used (1 lookup needed for each byte) to access the memory at `[address, address + 31]` using the byte values of `value`:

- `MLOAD`: the lookup is a read op (`is_write == false`)
- `MSTORE`/`MSTORE8`: the lookup is a write op (`is_write == true`)
  For `MSTORE8` a single busmapping lookup is used to write the LSB of `value` to `address`, but this lookup is done 32 times so we can reuse the same lookup constraints.

## Constraints

1. opcodeId checks
   1. opId === OpcodeId(0x51) for `MLOAD`
   2. opId === OpcodeId(0x52) for `MSTORE`
   3. opId === OpcodeId(0x53) for `MSTORE8`
2. state transition:
   - gc
     - `MLOAD`/`MSTORE`:  +34 (2 stack operations + 32 memory reads/writes)
     - `MSTORE8`: +3 (2 stack operations + 1 memory write)
   - stack_pointer
     - `MLOAD`: remains the same
     - `MSTORE`: -2
   - pc + 1
   - gas + 3 + `memory_gas_cost`
   - memory_size is set to `next_memory_size`
3. lookups:
   - `MLOAD`/`MSTORE`: 34 busmapping lookups, `MSTORE8`: 3 busmapping lookups
     - stack:
       - `address` is popped off the top of the stack
       - `value`
         - is pushed on top of the stack for `MLOAD`
         - is popped off the top of the stack for `MSTORE`/`MSTORE8`
     - memory:
       - `MLOAD`/`MSTORE`: The 32 bytes of `value` are read/written from/to memory at `address`.
       - `MSTORE8`: The LSB of `value` is written to `address`.
   - 29 fixed lookups

## Exceptions

1. stack underflow:
   - the stack is empty: `1024 == stack_pointer`
   - only for `MSTORE`/`MSTORE8`: contains a single value: `1023 == stack_pointer`
2. out of gas:
   - Any of other byte values of `address` other than the 5 LSBs are non-zero
   - The remaining gas after the opcode cost of `3` + the memory expansion gas cost is insufficient

## Code

Please refer to `src/zkevm-specs/opcode/mload_mstore.py`.

Commit message:

mload mstore and mstore8 opcode modification (#358)
* mload mstore and mstore8 opcode

* test draft

* memory test wip

* mload test

* uncomment out condition

* mload dynamic memory test

* mload test simple case

* add mload test data

* add mstore test case

* add mstore test case

* add mstore8 test case

* Apply suggestions from @han0110's code review

* Apply suggestions from @ed255's code review

specs/opcode/51MLOAD_52MSTORE_53MSTORE8.md, after:

# MLOAD & MSTORE & MSTORE8 opcodes

## Procedure

### EVM behavior

`MLOAD` loads a word (32 bytes of data) from memory. This is done by popping the `address` from the stack. The data at `[address, address + 31]` is then loaded from memory and pushed to the stack
`MSTORE` writes a word (32 bytes of data) to memory. This is done by popping two value, the `address` and then the `value`, from the stack. `value` is then written to memory at `[address, address + 31]`
`MSTORE8` works similarly to `MSTORE` except that only the LSB of `value` is written to `address`

1. A const gas cost: `3 gas`
2. A dynamic gas cost: a dynamic gas depends on the highest memory location accessed

The highest memory location is calculated as follows:

```
MLOAD, MSTORE: address + 32 (32 bytes are read/written)
MSTORE8: address + 1 (a byte is written)
```

The memory size is calculated as follows:

```
memory_size(address) := ceil(address/32)
```

The memory cost is calculated as follows:

```
Gmem := 3
memory_cost(memory_size) := Gmem * memory_size + floor(memory_size * memory_size / 512)
```

The gas cost charged for the op is the additional `memory_size` needed:

```
MLOAD/MSTORE: offset := 32, MSTORE8: offset := 1
next_memory_size := max(curr_memory_size, memory_size(address + offset))
memory_gas_cost := memory_cost(next_memory_size) - memory_cost(curr_memory_size)
```

### Circuit behavior

The `MemoryGadget` takes arguments `address: [u8;32]`, `value: [u8;32]`, `curr_memory_size: u64`, `opcode: u8`. There are also some additional helper inputs used by the general gadgets used for the implementation.

There is a check if `opcode` is `MLOAD`, `MSTORE` or `MSTORE8`, which is used to change some operations so the correct logic for each opcode is done.

The memory expansion calculations and the memory addressing use a partial address value consisting of the 5 LSBs of address. If any other of the higher bytes are used an out-of-gas exception is always thrown.

The new memory size and gas necessary for a potential memory expansion is calculated using the formulas above.

For the stack busmapping lookups, the top value is always the `address`. Then, depending on the opcode:

- `MLOAD`: `value` is pushed on top of the stack (`stack_offset == 0; is_write == true`)
- `MSTORE`/`MSTORE8`: `value` is popped from top of the stack (`stack_offset == 1; is_write == false`)

For `MLOAD`/`MSTORE` 32 memory busmapping lookups are used (1 lookup needed for each byte) to access the memory at `[address, address + 31]` using the byte values of `value`:

- `MLOAD`: the lookup is a read op (`is_write == false`)
- `MSTORE`/`MSTORE8`: the lookup is a write op (`is_write == true`)
  For `MSTORE8` a single busmapping lookup is used to write the LSB of `value` to `address`, but this lookup is done 32 times so we can reuse the same lookup constraints.

## Constraints

1. opcodeId checks
   1. opId === OpcodeId(0x51) for `MLOAD`
   2. opId === OpcodeId(0x52) for `MSTORE`
   3. opId === OpcodeId(0x53) for `MSTORE8`
2. state transition:
   - gc
     - `MLOAD`/`MSTORE`:  + 34 (2 stack operations + 32 memory reads/writes)
     - `MSTORE8`: + 3 (2 stack operations + 1 memory write)
   - stack_pointer
     - `MLOAD`: remains the same
     - `MSTORE`: + 2
   - pc + 1
   - gas + 3 + `memory_gas_cost`
   - memory_size is set to `next_memory_size`
3. lookups:
   - `MLOAD`/`MSTORE`: 34 busmapping lookups, `MSTORE8`: 3 busmapping lookups
     - stack:
       - `address` is popped off the top of the stack
       - `value`
         - is pushed on top of the stack for `MLOAD`
         - is popped off the top of the stack for `MSTORE`/`MSTORE8`
     - memory:
       - `MLOAD`/`MSTORE`: The 32 bytes of `value` are read/written from/to memory at `address`.
       - `MSTORE8`: The LSB of `value` is written to `address`.
   - 29 fixed lookups

## Exceptions

1. stack underflow:
   - the stack is empty: `1024 == stack_pointer`
   - only for `MSTORE`/`MSTORE8`: contains a single value: `1023 == stack_pointer`
2. out of gas:
   - Any of other byte values of `address` other than the 5 LSBs are non-zero
   - The remaining gas after the opcode cost of `3` + the memory expansion gas cost is insufficient

## Code

Please refer to `src/zkevm-specs/opcode/mload_mstore.py`.
